---
title: "Powers of Horror: An Essay on Abjection "
description: "Abjection is merely the inability to assume with sufficient
strength the imperative act of excluding abject things (and that act establishes the foundations of collective existence)."
publishDate: 2025-07-04
---

"In the beginning was emotion . . . ," Celine often repeated
in his writings and interviews. Reading him, one has the impression that in the beginning was discomfort.
Suffering as the place of the subject. Where it emerges, where
it is differentiated from chaos. An incandescent, unbearable
limit between inside and outside, ego and other. The initial,
fleeting grasp: "suffering," "fear," ultimate words sighting the
crest where sense topples over into the senses, the "intimate"
into "nerves." Being as ill-being.
Celine's narrative is a narrative of suffering and horror, not
only because the "themes" are there, as such, but because his
whole narrative stance seems controlled by the necessity of
going through abjection, whose intimate side is suffering and
horror its public feature.
This much is becoming known after so much "Russian formalism" but also after so many biographies confided on the
couch: a narrative is, all in all, the most elaborate attempt, next
to syntactic competence, to situate a speaking being between
his desires and their prohibitions, in short, within the Oedipal
triangle.
But not until the advent of twentieth-century "abject" lit-
*On est puceau de l'Horreur comme on est puceau de la Volupte

erature (the sort that takes up where apocalypse and carnival
left off) did one realize that the narrative web is a thin film
constantly threatened with bursting. For, when narrated identity is unbearable, when the boundary between subject and
object is shaken, and when even the limit between inside and
outside becomes uncertain, the narrative is what is challenged
first. If it continues nevertheless, its makeup changes; its linearity is shattered, it proceeds by flashes, enigmas, short cuts,
incompletion, tangles, and cuts. At a later stage, the unbearable
identity of the narrator and of the surroundings that are supposed to sustain him can no longer be narrated but cries out or
is descried with maximal stylistic intensity (language of violence,
of obscenity, or of a rhetoric that relates the text to poetry).
The narrative yields to a crying-out theme that, when it tends to
coincide with the incandescent states of a boundary-subjectivity
that I have called abjection, is the crying-out theme of sufferinghorror. In other words, the theme of suffering-horror is the
ultimate evidence of such states of abjection within a narrative
representation. If one wished to proceed farther still along the
approaches to abjection, one would find neither narrative nor
theme but a recasting of syntax and vocabulary—the violence
of poetry, and silence